PowerShell Conditional Statements - closes #172 (#178)
bob-crutchley/notes: topics/powershell/modules/conditional-statements/README.md

	- [Calculate the User's Input with `if`, `else` & `elseif`](#calculate-the-users-input-with-if-else--elseif)
	- [Calculate the User's Input with a `switch` Statment](#calculate-the-users-input-with-a-switch-statment)

<!--TOC_END-->
## Overview
Conditional statements in PowerShell enable scripts to make descisions based on provided conditions.
PowerShell is like many other languages, using `if`, `else`, `elseif` and `switch` statements.
Conditions are evaluated to a boolean value (True or False).

## `if`, `else` & `elseif` Statements
### `if`
The `if` statement can be used to execute statements based on whether the provied condition is true or not:
```powershell
if (true) {
    echo "this statement will execute because the condition is true"
}
if (false) {
    echo "this statement will not execute because the condition is not true"
}
```
### `else`
The `else` statement can be used in conjunction with the `if` statement to provide a block of statements to run if the `if` condition is not met:
```powershell
if (false) {
    echo "this statement will not run"
} else {
    echo "this statement will run, because the 'if' condition was not met"
}
```
### `elseif`

> If there is more than one condition that you are going to need to check then using the `elseif` will help with this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `elseif` will help if there's more than one condition that you're going to need to check.
```

> You can have as many `ifelse` as you like however, if you start getting many, more than 2 or 3 for instance, then you should consider using a `switch` statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can have as many `elseif` statements as you like, but if you start getting many more than 2 or 3, for instance, you should consider using a `switch` statement.
```

```powershell
if (false) {
    echo "this statement will not run"
} elseif (true) { echo "this statement will run" } else {
    echo "this statement will not run because the 'ifelse' condition was met"
}
```
### Nesting Statements

> These statements can of course be nested, be cautious when doing this though, having lots of nested statements can be very detrimental to the readability of the code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These statements can, of course, be nested. However, be cautious when doing this, as having lots of nested statements can be very detrimental to the readability of the code:
```

```powershell
if (true) {
    echo "this statement will run"
    if (false) {
        echo "this statement won't run"
    } else {
        echo "this statement will run"
    }
}
```
## `switch` Statement

> The `switch` statement is more more appropriate to use when you want to test equality, for instance checking if a given value eqauls something specific.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `switch` statement is more appropriate to use when you want to test equality; for instance, checking if a given value eqauls something specific.
```

### Example

> The example shown below will ask the user for a number between 1 and 3, once a number has been selected `"You selected [NUMBER]"` will be printed to the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example shown below will ask the user for a number between 1 and 3. Once a number has been selected, `"You selected [NUMBER]"` will be printed to the terminal.
```

If a number between 1 and 3 isn't entered then `"You didn't select a number between 1 and 3"` will be displayed on the terminal.

```powershell
switch (Read-Host "Pick a number between 1 and 3") {
    1 {"You selected 1"; break}
    2 {"You selected 2"; break}
    3 {"You selected 3"; break}
    default {"You didn't select a number between 1 and 3"}
}
```

For each statement, the first number on the line is being checked against what was provided in the `Read-Host` statement.

> If the number matches then then block between the brances `{}` will be executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the number matches, the block between the brances `{}` will be executed.
```

If a match is found, the switch statement will still continue to check the other statements, unless a `break` statement is issued.

> Should none of the statements match, then the `default` block will be executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Should none of the statements match, the `default` block will be executed.
```

## Tasks
This set of tasks will show you how `if`, `else`, `elseif` and `switch` statements can be applied to a simple PowerShell script.

The PowerShell script will figure out how much someone weighs on another planet:
- User input for the weight
- User input for selecting which Planet
- Multiply the relative gravity by the weight and output it

### Obtain the User Input
Create a script called `space-weight.ps1` and enter the following to gain the user input for the `weight` and the `planetNumber` to change the weight to.

> The unit of weight can be obtained as well just to make the output at the end a little nicer:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The unit of weight can be obtained as well, just to make the output at the end a little nicer:
```

```powershell
$unit = Read-Host "What is the unit of weight? (KG/lbs)"
$weight = Read-Host "Please enter a weight: "
$planetNumber = Read-Host "
Which planet would you like to know how much this weighs on?
   1. Venus   2. Mars    3. Jupiter
   4. Saturn  5. Uranus  6. Neptune
"
```
### Calculate the User's Input with `if`, `else` & `elseif`

> Using the `weight` and `planetNumber` variables we can now figure out what weight it is going to be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the `weight` and `planetNumber` variables, we can now figure out what weight it is going to be.
```

> Here we are going to add `if` and `elseif` statements to figure out which Planet they selected and then multiply the weight by the relative gravity for the Planet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we are going to add `if` and `elseif` statements, to figure out which Planet the user selected, and then we will multiply the weight by the relative gravity for the Planet.
```

> If the user selects a number from the list that doesn't exist then this can be caught in an `else` statement to inform the user that they have made an  invalid selection:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the user selects a number from the list that doesn't exist then this can be caught in an `else` statement, to inform the user that they have made an  invalid selection:
```

```powershell
# user input
$unit = Read-Host "What is the unit of weight? (KG/lbs)"
$weight = Read-Host "Please enter a weight"
$planetNumber = Read-Host "
Which planet would you like to know how much this weighs on?
   1. Venus   2. Mars    3. Jupiter
   4. Saturn  5. Uranus  6. Neptune
"
# calculate the user's input
if ($planetNumber -eq 1) {
    $planetName = "Venus"
    $weightOnPlanet = [Int]$weight * 0.78
} elseif ($planetNumber -eq 2) {
    $planetName = "Mars"
    $weightOnPlanet = [Int]$weight * 0.39
} elseif ($planetNumber -eq 3) {
    $planetName = "Jupiter"
    $weightOnPlanet = [Int]$weight * 2.65
} elseif ($planetNumber -eq 4) {
    $planetName = "Saturn"
    $weightOnPlanet = [Int]$weight * 1.17
} elseif ($planetNumber -eq 5) {
    $planetName = "Uranus"
    $weightOnPlanet = [Int]$weight * 1.05
} elseif ($planetNumber -eq 6) {
    $planetName = "Neptune"
    $weightOnPlanet = [Int]$weight * 1.23
} else {
    echo "Sorry, the planet number: $planetNumber is not recognised"
    exit
}
echo "On planet $planetName, $weight $unit would weigh: $weightOnPlanet $unit"
```

> Once you have created the script try running it!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have created the script, try running it!
```

```powershell
./space-weight.ps1
```
### Calculate the User's Input with a `switch` Statment

> The last script will work fine however it can be cleaned up quite a bit by using a `switch` statement instead, utilising the same logic that was implemented in the `if`, `elseif`, `else` example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last script will work fine, but it can be cleaned up quite a bit by using a `switch` statement instead; this will utilise the same logic that was implemented in the `if`, `elseif`, `else` example:
```

```powershell
# user input
$unit = Read-Host "What is the unit of weight? (KG/lbs)"
$weight = Read-Host "Please enter your weight"
$planetNumber = Read-Host "
Which planet would you like to know how much this weighs on?
   1. Venus   2. Mars    3. Jupiter
   4. Saturn  5. Uranus  6. Neptune
"
# calculate the user's input
switch ($planetNumber) {
    1 {
        $planetName = "Venus"
        $weightOnPlanet = [Int]$weight * 0.78
        break
    }
    2 {
        $planetName = "Mars"
        $weightOnPlanet = [Int]$weight * 0.39
        break
    }
    3 {
        $planetName = "Jupiter"
        $weightOnPlanet = [Int]$weight * 2.65
        break
    }
    4 {
        $planetName = "Saturn"
        $weightOnPlanet = [Int]$weight * 1.17
        break
    }
    5 {
        $planetName = "Uranus"
        $weightOnPlanet = [Int]$weight * 1.05
        break
    }
    6 {
        $planetName = "Neptune"
        $weightOnPlanet = [Int]$weight * 1.23
        break
    }
    default {
        echo "Planet Number: $planetNumber is not recognised"
        exit
    }
}
echo "On planet $planetName, $weight $unit would weigh: $weightOnPlanet $unit"
```

> Now try running the script again but with the `switch` statement implented!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now try running the script again, but with the `switch` statement implented!
```
